.. post:: 2011-12-12
   :author: Josh Crompton

Why philosophers make good programmers
######################################

I was speaking to a guy recently and it came up that I was a software
developer. He asked if I had majored in Computer Science. I told him no,
my degree was in Philosophy. The guy was blown off his feet. What on
earth could philosophy have to do with programming? It's never really
seemed strange to me. So, here are some reasons why philosophers make
good programmers.

One field of philosophy is Ontology, very loosely, the study of what
there is. What things exist, what makes up reality. This same kind of
thinking applies to object oriented design: what kinds of things should
a program be made up of? It might sound esoteric, but being familiar
with that kind of questioning makes object orientation feel pretty
natural.

Another obvious one is formal logic. Boolean logic is foundational to
computers, and studying other branches of logic prepares the mind for
the kind of things a programmer does much better than mathematics. The
kind of thinking you need to work out a proof in modal logic, or perform
some feat with peano arithmetic feels very similar to debugging, or
working through some sticky technical problem.

Philosophy of Science and Epistemology are both important to testing.
I read Feyerabend's *Against Method* as one long argument for
context-driven testing. Epistemology, the study of how we can have
knowledge, is also relevant to the ambiguities I've faced as a software
tester: how can I know a bug is gone? How can I know I've tested enough?
Philosophy of Mind has only recently spawned Cognitive Science. Both are
intimately linked with artificial intelligence.

Finally, and most generally, the whole orientation toward questioning
what's best, what aims we should pursue and why, ties in closely to why
I enjoy programming. There are endless ways I could write any particular
program. In choosing a particular way, I'm discarding all the others. I
had better have damned good reasons for doing so. (Many of the debates I
see about the merits of various languages look a lot to me like
philosophical arguments for the same reason.) Philosophy orients you
toward doing things for reasons. And ultimately, that's the most
important thing of all.
