.. post:: 2014-12-07
   :tags: Django, Python
   :author: Josh Crompton

Django's models are just fine without descriptors
#################################################
:date:  18:59
:author: jscn
:slug: djangos-models-are-just-fine-without-descriptors


In his post `"Django Model
Descriptors" <http://blog.kevinastone.com/django-model-descriptors.html>`__,
the author, Kevin Stone, asserts that using descriptors is a good way to
extend the functionality of Django models and fields to include business
logic. While descriptors do make this possible, I do not agree that
doing so is a good idea. I also contend that there are simpler ways to
achieve the same results, should one wish to do so.

Models should not include business logic
----------------------------------------

A model's duty (you might say, it's single responsibility) is to
validate data and handle storing and retrieving that data. If you start
adding other responsibilities to a model object, that is going to cause
all the problems associated with violating the `Single Responsibility
Principle <http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?SingleResponsibilityPrinciple>`__.

This seems to be a common pattern with Django applications. A lot of
Django models get really fat, filled to the brim with business logic,
because it's the easy place to put that stuff. But it's not the model's
responsibility. The model's responsibility is to validate, store and
retrieve data.

One effect of this anti-pattern is that your unit tests will be slow
because they *must* interact with the database, even when you are only
trying to test your application's business logic. It also makes it is
harder to reason about your program. It means your application is more
tightly coupled to the Django code, so if you have to change to another
framework for some reason, it will be much harder to extract the
relevant code from the irrelevant. In short, it's a violation of SRP,
and comes with all the risks and problems associated with that.

Computed values
---------------

Stone correctly shoots down the idea of just adding convenience methods
to a model as a way of getting computed values. This is another common
anti-pattern in Django applications. It's easy to do, and it doesn't
seem to do too much harm. If it gets to be "too much" and the model
becomes "too complicated", then it can always be refactored, right? Of
course, this refactoring almost never happens. Especially once code in
other parts of your application starts relying on the existence of these
convenience methods (which it will do immediately, since you added the
convenience method in order for code elsewhere in your application to
use it).

Stone suggests that a good alternative to convenience methods is to use
descriptors to extend the functionality of the field. Essentially, he
wants to move the convenience methods from the model class to the field
class.

But this is no solution at all. The convenience methods still exist,
they have just been moved more deeply into the object hierarchy. Now
your code violates the Law of Demeter as well as the SRP. In Stone's
example, to get the hostname you must call ``object.url.hostname``. Now
you have too much knowledge of the internals of your model and its
fields. Worse, you've the added the responsibility of manipulating data
to your field class, whose sole responsibility should be to translate
between database values and Python values.

So Stone's example solves one problem by replacing it with another,
different problem, while introducing a lot of complexity to the code:
descriptors, a sub-class of ``URLField`` and added some metaprogramming
shenanigans.

Put the "Object" back into "Object Oriented"
--------------------------------------------

In Stone's example, it would be much cleaner to introduce a new object
with the **single responsibility** of extracting a hostname from a URL
string [#f1]_.
This allows us to unit test that functionality without touching the
database and re-use that object in other projects (which may not involve
Django at all.)

Alternate representations of data
---------------------------------

A second possible use for descriptors that Stone presents is as a way of
offering alternative representations of model data. The example he
presents of making a timestamp do double duty as a boolean is a pattern
I also like, and one I've used a lot. However, it is not a good
candidate for the use of descriptors as he suggests.

It is pretty clear that the responsibility of a Django ``Field`` class
is to validate and translate data between the database and Python. The
job of offering alternate representations of that data is clearly out of
scope. But the suggested solution violates the Single Responsibility
Principle, introduces unnecessary complexity and makes the code harder
to understand.

I've already talked about the first problem, so I'll only mention here
that Stone introduces a descriptor class in addition to a sub-class of
the the ``DateTimeField``. The same effect could be achieved with a
single line function on the model, ``is_published()`` which returns
whether or not the value of the field is ``None`` [#f2]_.  This is
much less complex and can be understood by a fellow developer in a
glance.

This would also mean that another developer (or myself at a later date)
is less likely to mistakenly think that the ``is_published`` property
is actually a database value that can be used to filter queryset
results. Again, this is a case of adding complexity for no gain.

Descriptors are the wrong tool for these jobs
---------------------------------------------

When I first heard about descriptors, I started thinking of all the cool
ways I could hack Django models with them. I could completely hide the
data of the model, and provide a much better thought out, more
intentional API. If the database representation changed, I could just
update the internals of the API methods and I wouldn't have to change my
application code.

But this is wrong thinking. A model is a model. Its duty is to expose
database values. The problem lies in thinking that it should do double
duty as a repository of business logic and other unrelated behaviour.

I get it, descriptors are a clever language feature and you can do
some nifty things with them. And Stone's blog post even does a pretty
good job of explaining what they are [#f3]_ and showing some possible
uses for them. But please don't implement those suggestions in your
production code. Using descriptors as Stone suggests will make your
code harder to reason about and harder to change in the future.


Footnotes
---------

.. [#f1] Two good candidates might be a ``Hostname`` class that takes a URL
	 string and returns the hostname portion from its ``__str__``\ method, or
	 a ``URL`` class that takes a URL string and returns the hostname portion
	 from a ``hostname`` property or method.

.. [#f2] If you really wanted it to be a property, not a method call, then
	 you could add a @property decorator. But I would leave it as method
	 unless doing so would break backwards compatibility, for the simple
	 reason that it is more immediately clear that it is a computed value,
	 not a database value.

.. [#f3] `Fraser Tweedale's PyCon AU 2014 talk on descriptors
	 <http://pyvideo.org/video/3123/descriptors-attribute-access-redefined-by-fraser>`__
	 dives into much more detail.
